# rooz

TLDR: Rooz is a tool similar to [toolbox](https://docs.fedoraproject.org/en-US/fedora-silverblue/toolbox/)
or [distrobox](https://github.com/89luca89/distrobox) but unlike them it aims to share as little as possible with the host.
Also it is focused around git repositories.

## Trick yourself into feeling home in a container.

* Let's make the host just have your browser, your VS Code, and your containers runtime.
* Let's do everything else in containers; store everything in container volumes.
* Let's bring your own OCI image with tooling & config.
* Let's see what happens...

## Basic facts

* :warning: This project in the current state is experimental. DO NOT USE.

* The first time you run `rooz` it generates you an SSH key pair and stores it in a container volume.
  Use that key to authenticate to your repos. They ssh key volume is then shared between all `rooz` containers.

* If you just run `rooz` it launches a free-style container, i.e. doesn't clone anything.
* You can also clone git repos with `rooz` and they'll run either in:
    * the default image: `bitnami/git:latest`
    * an image you specified via `ROOZ_IMAGE`
    * an image you specified via `--image` cmd-line parameter
    * an image specified in the cloned repo in `.rooz.toml` like:

    ```toml
    image = "ghcr.io/queil/image:0.16.0-dotnet"
    shell = "bash"
    ```

* `rooz` runs as uid `1000` (always - it's hard-coded) so make sure it exists in your image
(with `rooz_user` as the name - it can be overridden via `ROOZ_USER` or `--user`)
* the default shell is `bash` but you can override it via:
    * `ROOZ_SHELL` env var
    * `--shell` cmd-line parameter
    * in `.rooz.toml` via `shell`

* cloned git repos are always mounted under `~/work/{repo_name}` where `repo_name` is the default one generated by `git` during cloning.
* caching - `rooz` supports basic path-keyed shared caches. It can be set per-repo like:

    ```toml
    caches = [
      "~/.nuget"
    ]
    ```

    All the repos specifying a cache path will share a container volume mounted at that path enabling cache reuse.
    It also can be set globally via `ROOZ_CACHES` (comma-separated paths). The global paths get combined with repo-specific paths.

* you enable `rooz` debug logging by setting `RUST_LOG=rooz` env variable

* if `rooz` misbehaves you can go nuclear and run `rooz --prune-all` to remove all the running rooz containers and volumes excluding
  the ssh key volume. If you want to delete it do: `docker volume rm --force rooz-ssh-key-vol`

  :warning: `rooz --prune-all` deletes all your state held with `rooz` so make sure everything important is stored before.

* you can also prune containers/volumes scoped to a particular repository by specifying `--prune` switch together with the repo url

## Limitations

* Experiment/POC so may contains traces of bugs, (or even some whole bugs)
* So far `linux-amd64` only
* This is my first Rust project (learning the language) so please excuse me the code quality here
* rooz's `known_hosts` only contains github.com entries
* Only tested with some alpine and ubuntu images. It may work with other distros too.

## Install

```sh
curl -sSL https://github.com/queil/rooz/releases/latest/download/rooz -o ./rooz && chmod +x ./rooz && sudo mv ./rooz /usr/local/bin
```

## Known issues

* When a volume is first crated container automatically populates it from the image
  (assuming there are any files in the corresponding directory in the image). It only happens if
  the volume is empty. So if you try to mount pre-existing volumes to a container with a new image the volumes' contents won't be updated.
  It is particularly annoying with the home dir volume as it holds user-specific configurations and may be wildly different from
  one image to another. A workaround could be to drop the home dir volume so that it gets recreated with the new content, however
  that way we lose things like `.bash_history`. To be resolved...

* auto-resizing rooz session to fit the terminal window (if resized) is not implemented

## Running with Podman

1. Make sure podman remote socket is enabled:

`podman info` should contain the following YAML:

```yaml
remoteSocket:
    exists: true
    path: /run/user/1000/podman/podman.sock
```

If `exists: true` is missing, try this command: `systemctl --user enable --now podman.socket`

2. Make sure you have the podman socket exposed as the `DOCKER_HOST` env var like:

```
export DOCKER_HOST=unix:///run/user/1000/podman/podman.sock
```

3. Use fully-qualified image names or define unqualified-search registries `/etc/containers/registries.conf`

4. When running podman in podman you may need to run rooz with `--disable-selinux` switch
   which is equivalent to `--security-opt label=disable` in Podman/Docker.

## Resources

* [my image I use with rooz](https://github.com/queil/image/blob/main/src/Dockerfile)
